## Introduction

*The air was hot and heavy with dust. Moses squinted as he took in the sight before him. Hundreds of years after the death of their great ancestor Israel, whose birth-name was Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, here they were trudging through the desert on their way to the promised land. Moses smiled, remembering God’s promise to make the descendants of Israel as numerous as the dust on the ground. The same God who made those promises to their forefathers long ago had now rescued them from captivity in Egypt, where they had been oppressed by the pharaoh for fear of their great numbers. But, even as he thought about their great rescue, Moses couldn’t help but look forward to the land where they were headed. It was a rich land, flowing with milk and honey, but saturated with false gods and often violent, pagan traditions. Moses was leading millions of Israelites, but they were naive, sheltered from the world around them. They had long ago lost hold of their traditions and in some ways even their unique identity as Israelites. Without the structure of time and tradition, how would they survive once they entered the new land? Moses was not naive. He had been raised in the house of pharaoh and had seen much of the Egyptian world. He knew the peoples and their history. He could read and he could write. Even more so, he spoke to God, face to face, as one speaks to a friend. Yes, if anyone was going to remind the children of Israel who they were, where they came from, and who their God is, it was going to be him. They didn’t escape Egypt by their own power, and they didn’t escape with the help of Egypt’s gods or pagan spirits. They were rescued, and it was by the hand of Yahweh, the God of their forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It was time to write that story down, to record what happened in the beginning, and by the grace of God, Moses was going to do it.*

Genesis is the book of beginning. It tells the history of the beginning of the world and the beginning of a unique people. But, unlike other history books, this one makes no attempt to be completely objective. It was written with a clear agenda. The author, Moses, wrote the book to teach the Israelites who they were and who their God was. Having been raised in Pharaoh's house, Moses was uniquely qualified for this job. He was well-educated and could both read and write. So, more than a thousand years before Jesus was born, Moses set to writing this book. Like the rest of the Bible, Genesis was written under the inspiration of God. This does not mean that the text is completely without error. It doesn't mean that everything recorded is good and right. It means that God wanted these words written down, the good and the bad, the right and the wrong, so that we can learn from them. But, before we start thinking that this book is all about us, it's important to point out once again that this book was written by an author (Moses) in a specific time in history, for a specific purpose, and to a specific audience. If we want to learn from these words, we must first understand them in their original context. The point of this study is to go verse by verse through the book of Genesis and help the reader understand what was written and why it was written. As we learn about the God of Israel and the world he created, we learn about the God who still lives today and in whose world we live.
