## Introduction

Genesis is the book of beginning. It tells the history of the beginning of the world and the beginning of a unique people. But, unlike other history books, this one makes no attempt to be completely objective. It was written with a clear agenda. The author, Moses, wrote the book to teach the Israelites who they were and who their God was. Having been raised in Pharaoh's house, Moses was uniquely qualified for this job. He was well-educated and could both read and write. So, more than a thousand years before Jesus was born, Moses set to writing this book. Like the rest of the Bible, Genesis was written under the inspiration of God. This does not mean that the text is completely without error. It doesn't mean that everything recorded is good and right. It means that God wanted these words written down, the good and the bad, the right and the wrong, so that we can learn from them. But, before we start thinking that this book is all about us, it's important to point out once again that this book was written by an author (Moses) in a specific time in history, for a specific purpose, and to a specific audience. If we want to learn from these words, we must first understand them in their original context. The point of this study is to go verse by verse through the book of Genesis and help the reader understand what was written and why it was written. As we learn about the God of Israel and the world he created, we learn about the God who still lives today and in whose world we live.
