## Genesis 1.1-2.3

> 1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.

Earth has not always existed. The sky, space has not always existed. They had a definite beginning, and God was the one who brought them about. This sums up the creation narrative. This is the point of the creation narrative. God created the heavens above and the earth below. The Hebrew verb used here is בָּרָא (bārā'), which means to create, presumably from nothing. Only God can create something from nothing. This world is not an accident. It was the intentional creation of an intelligent God.

> 2 Now the earth was without shape and empty, and darkness was over the surface of the watery deep, but the Spirit of God was moving over the surface of the water.

This sets the stage for the creation event. God's Spirit hovered over this dark, watery nothingness as he prepared to make something incredible.

> 3 God said, “Let there be light.” And there was light!

God's word has power. All that he has to do is speak a word and matter comes into existence. Previously, there was darkness. But, with this declaration God brought light into being. The dark, watery nothingness was no longer dark.

> 4 God saw that the light was good, so God separated the light from the darkness. 5 God called the light “day” and the darkness “night.” There was evening, and there was morning, marking the first day.

This is the first use of a refrain that ends each day of creation. Each day of creation begins with "God said" and ends with "There was evening, and there was morning" marking the first, second, third, etc. day.

> 6 God said, “Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it separate water from water. 7 So God made the expanse and separated the water under the expanse from the water above it. It was so. 8 God called the expanse “sky.” There was evening, and there was morning, a second day.

God began with a dark, watery nothingness. First, he addressed the darkness by creating light. Now, he brought order to the waters, separating the oceans below from the skies above. This was the second day of creation.

> 9 God said, “Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place and let dry ground appear.” It was so. 10 God called the dry ground “land” and the gathered waters he called “seas.” God saw that it was good.

Finally, God formed the ground of the earth. What had been a dark, watery nothingness was now bright, with skies above, and land and seas below. What was disordered and chaotic was now organized, and God liked it. He pronounced it good. But, he wasn't yet done with day three. He had more to do.

> 11 God said, “Let the land produce vegetation: plants yielding seeds according to their kinds, and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds.” It was so. 12 The land produced vegetation – plants yielding seeds according to their kinds, and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds. God saw that it was good. 13 There was evening, and there was morning, a third day.

The land was no longer bare. There were flowers, trees, fruit, and seeds. The earth was full of incredible, beautiful plant life. God looked at it all and pronounced it good. This was the third day of creation.

> 14 God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to separate the day from the night, and let them be signs to indicate seasons and days and years, 15 and let them serve as lights in the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth.” It was so. 16 God made two great lights – the greater light to rule over the day and the lesser light to rule over the night. He made the stars also. 17 God placed the lights in the expanse of the sky to shine on the earth, 18 to preside over the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. God saw that it was good. 19 There was evening, and there was morning, a fourth day.

On day four, God revisited his work from day one. On that first day, he created light. But, now he made celestial bodies to provide and reflect that light. This included the Earth's sun, its moon, and all of the stars. These bodies would not only provide light, but they would mark seasons, days, and years. They would bring order to time. God looked at it all and pronounced it good. That was the fourth day of creation.

> 20 God said, “Let the water swarm with swarms of living creatures and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the sky.” 21 God created the great sea creatures and every living and moving thing with which the water swarmed, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. God saw that it was good. 22 God blessed them and said, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the water in the seas, and let the birds multiply on the earth.” 23 There was evening, and there was morning, a fifth day.

On day five, God revisited his work from day two. On that second day, he had separated the waters of the earth from the skies above. On this day, God filled the waters below with sea creatures, fish, and other aquatic life. Then, he filled the sky above with birds and other flying creatures. God looked at it all and pronounced it good. But, beyond that he also blessed those creatures, telling them to fill the seas and the skies with more of themselves. As the plants would reproduce themselves after their kind, so would the water and sky creatures. This concluded the fifth day.

> 24 God said, “Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds: cattle, creeping things, and wild animals, each according to its kind.” It was so. 25 God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the cattle according to their kinds, and all the creatures that creep along the ground according to their kinds. God saw that it was good.

Now, on day six, God revisited his work from day three. On that day, he had formed the dry ground. Now, he filled that land with creatures. This included everything from the largest mammals down to the smalles bugs, and everything in-between. As with the plants, fish and birds, these animals would reproduce each after their own kind until they filled the whole earth. But, as with day three, God had more to do. He had one more creature left to create.

> 26 Then God said, “Let us make humankind in our image, after our likeness, so they may rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move on the earth.”
>
> 27 God created humankind in his own image, in the image of God he created them, male and female he created them.

Notice what God said. He said let "us" make humankind in "our" image. The Israelites were monotheistic. They believed in one God. But, these words point to some sort of plurality with God. This plurality is only hinted at in the book of Genesis, but is expanded with the concept of the Trinity later in the scriptures. God is one God, who is made up of the Father, the Son (also called The Word), and the Holy Spirit. If you look at the creation narrative with this in mind, you can see all three persons of God at work with the Spirit preparing, the Father declaring, and the Son (The Word) implementing.

Unlike the fish, birds, plants, and animals, this creation of mankind was unique because mankind was created "in the image of God." As God brought order from the chaos, so mankind would do. They would be God's representatives on the earth and continue his creative work.

> 28 God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply! Fill the earth and subdue it! Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and every creature that moves on the ground.”

As with the animals, God told mankind to multiply and fill the earth. But, beyond that he told them to subdue it. That is what God did to the dark, watery nothingness. He took that chaos and made something incredible. Humanity was given something much better, a whole earth with land and oceans, plants and animals. It would be their job to continue God's creative work on the earth.

> 29 Then God said, “I now give you every seed-bearing plant on the face of the entire earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food. 30 And to all the animals of the earth, and to every bird of the air, and to all the creatures that move on the ground – everything that has the breath of life in it – I give every green plant for food.” It was so.
>
> 31 God saw all that he had made – and it was very good! There was evening, and there was morning, the sixth day.

To end this final day of creation, God gave the plants and their fruits as food to mankind and the other creatures of the earth. There would be no killing, no bloodshed, no eating of flesh. They would eat of the richness of the land. God looked at everything he had made and it wasn't just good, it was "very good!" That concluded the sixth day of creation.

> 1 The heavens and the earth were completed with everything that was in them. 2 By the seventh day God finished the work that he had been doing, and he ceased on the seventh day all the work that he had been doing. 3 God blessed the seventh day and made it holy because on it he ceased all the work that he had been doing in creation.

The seventh day was unique in that God did not do any creation. Instead, he rested from his work. This was not because God got tired from working. This was to set up a pattern which would be repeated through the law of the Israelites and reiterated throughout the scriptures. God blessed that last day as a special day to rest from the work of the week, and God wanted his people to do the same. They were to work through the week and set apart one day each week just for rest.

This concludes the creation narrative.

As the Israelites heard these words, as they began repeating them to their children, they would be reminded of who the God was that brought them out of Egypt. While the nations around them worshiped the sun, the moon, creatures, and idols made from materials of the earth, they knew that their God was not part of creation. He was the one in the beginning, before anything existed, and he was the one who created the sun, the moon, the stars, creatures, trees, and rocks. He was not a god made by human hands or imagination. He was and is the God who made human hands and gave us our imaginations.
