## Genesis 2.4-2.25

Some people see the account recorded in Genesis 2 as a different and competing creation story. That misses the point. The narrative in Genesis 2 compliments the creation story in chapter 1. The point of the first chapter is God. He is the one who created everyone and everything. The second chapter instead zooms in on the creation of mankind and how the original Adam was split into male and female. It focuses on human relations, both horizontally with other humans and also vertically with God. It presents us mankind've responsibility to the earth and shows where marriage came from. To relegate the chapter to "just another creation story" completely misses the point.

> 4 This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created – when the Lord God made the earth and heavens.

This is the first of eleven named sections in Genesis. Add the creation story and that makes twelve sections altogether. As the people of Israel were made up of twelve tribes, Genesis was divided into twelve sections which symbolized its completeness. This begins the tôlḏôṯ (תּוֹלְדוֹת) or "generations" of the heavens and the earth.

> 5 Now no shrub of the field had yet grown on the earth, and no plant of the field had yet sprouted, for the Lord God had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground.

God never meant for his creation to sit untouched. He worked for six days creating the world and plants and animals, then he handed it off to humanity to care for while he rested. The idea was that mankind would take this incredible earth and cultivate it. The Hebrew word for "cultivate" here is ʿāḇaḏ (עָבַד), which is most often translated "serve" in the Old Testament. Mankind would serve the earth, care for it. Mankind was not in conflict with the earth. Instead, it would be mankind's job to serve and care for this incredible creation that God had made.

> 6 Springs would well up from the earth and water the whole surface of the ground. 7 The Lord God formed the man from the soil of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.
> 
> 8 The Lord God planted an orchard in the east, in Eden; and there he placed the man he had formed.

On the third day of creation, God separated the water from the land, and it was from the dust of this ground that he formed mankind. He didn't just speak people into existence. He "formed" them and then "breathed" life into them. This implies time and care. Humanity is not an accident. Humanity exists and has the "breath of life" because God willed that they should.

> 9 The Lord God made all kinds of trees grow from the soil, every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food. (Now the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil were in the middle of the orchard.)

This is what people miss when they say that Genesis 2 is just another creation account. What we see here is God planting a garden in the midst of the earth that he had made. There are differences between the wilds of nature and a garden. A garden implies work, care, and effort. God created the whole earth and then made a special garden to put mankind into. Mankind would care for that garden and expand it to cover the face of the earth.

God filled this garden with beautiful trees and fruits, but two trees are mentioned in particular, the "tree or life" and the "tree of the knowledge of good and evil." These trees become central in Genesis 3, but for now are just mentioned as a side note.

> 10 Now a river flows from Eden to water the orchard, and from there it divides into four headstreams.
> 
> 11 The name of the first is Pishon; it runs through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. 12 (The gold of that land is pure; pearls and lapis lazuli are also there). 13 The name of the second river is Gihon; it runs through the entire land of Cush. 14 The name of the third river is Tigris; it runs along the east side of Assyria. The fourth river is the Euphrates.

This geography lesson does not mean much to us today, but its inclusion in Genesis 2 means that there was some significance to the people of Israel. While we today don't know where Havilah was, or if the Pishon and Gihon rivers even still exist, presumably the Israelites knew something about these places. The Tigris and Euphrates rivers do exist today, but we have no way of knowing if they are the same ones mentioned here. If they are the same, then it would likely place this garden somewhere within the area of modern-day Iraq.

> 15 The Lord God took the man and placed him in the orchard in Eden to care for it and to maintain it.

Eden means "delight." Got put mankind into the garden of delight and told them to care for (serve) and maintain it. Mankind's purpose is intertwined with the earth we inhabit. Without the earth, there would be no use for humans. And without humans, the earth would not have anyone to care for it. Humanity is most human when they are caring for the earth, maintaining it, serving it.

> 16 Then the Lord God commanded the man, “You may freely eat fruit from every tree of the orchard, 17 but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it you will surely die.”

Humanity was free to eat from any tree of the garden, including the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But, freedom is inseparable from responsibility. Just because you can do something doesn't mean you should. God warned that eating of that tree would lead to death. The tree of the knowledge of good and evil was not a trap. It was not a sadistic trick by God. It was an opportunity for mankind to choose if God and his creation were going to be enough for them, or if they instead wanted an experiential knowledge of good and evil.

God didn't have to make mankind free. He could have kept humanity naive and sheltered them to the extent that they wouldn't even have the option of accepting or rejecting him. He could have made them biological robots who just followed a predetermined path and never stepped out of line. But, God wanted more for humanity. He created mankind in his image, to represent him on the earth. It would be impossible to represent God if humanity was just mindless robots because God is not a mindless robot. As free agents, it was essential that humanity be free to choose their own destiny, good or bad, right or wrong.

> 18 The Lord God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a companion for him who corresponds to him.”

This is the first "not good" found so far in the book. While the creation as a whole was "good," and Adam "very good," there was still something missing. God lives in relationship. He said "let US make mankind" because God lives in community with himself (Father, Son, Spirit) and with his creations. While Adam could commune with God, there was no creature that was comparable to him among the creatures of the earth. So, God decided to remedy that.

Was this a mistake? Did God accidentally overlook Adam's lack of human companionship? As with the seventh day of creation where God rested as an example to his people, here God created the circumstances to graphically illustrate man's relationship to woman. In a world where men piled on wives like trophies, this passage would remind the Israelites of the roots and the significance of the marriage relationship.

> 19 The Lord God formed out of the ground every living animal of the field and every bird of the air. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them, and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name. 20 So the man named all the animals, the birds of the air, and the living creatures of the field, but for Adam no companion who corresponded to him was found.

Here, Adam began carrying on God's work from creation. When God created the Sun and Moon, he named them. Here, Adam continued that work by naming the creatures. But, as he carried out this task he began to realize that he was alone. In a world full of incredible creatures, there were none comparable to him.

> 21 So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was asleep, he took part of the man’s side and closed up the place with flesh. 22 Then the Lord God made a woman from the part he had taken out of the man, and he brought her to the man.

The word used for what was taken from Adam is ṣēlāʿ (צֵלָע) which is most often translated "side." It is nonsensical that many translations translate the word as "rib" rather than "side." Verses 21 and 22 are the only verses in the Old Testament where this word gets translated as "rib." While Adam slept, God took one "side" of him, essentially splitting him into two. The side taken was female ('iššâ in verse 2.23) and the side that remained was male ('îš in 2.23).

> 23 Then the man said, “This one at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; this one will be called ‘woman,’ for she was taken out of man.”

What had been one creature was now two, and Adam recognized that the two of them while separate beings still of the same flesh, of the same body.

> 24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and unites with his wife, and they become a new family.

God had originally created one human. This human was complete. This human contained both male and female. This original human was created in God's image, called to be his representative on the earth. When this person was split into male and female, each was half of that original creature. By coming together and working together, this man and woman combined to become once again that original creature, but in relationship.

Marriage is when a human male ('îš) and a human female ('iššâ) join together in relationship (like the original man and woman) to become one, to complete that image of God, to be fully equipped, complete, and ready to carry out the continued work of creation. This concept of marriage as one man and one woman being equal partners making up a complete whole was in sharp contrast to the world around them.

Many people then (like many of the Jewish patriarchs) defined marriage as one man with many wives. There were some cultures who defined marriage as one woman with many husbands. Today, some would define marriage as including a man with a man and a woman with a woman. But, rules are not defined by their exceptions. Humanity is a study in exceptions. We make sport of gray areas. But, none of that changes the reality that God started with one human, split them into male and female, and when a man and woman come together in marriage they become one, essentially re-creating that original, complete human.

> 25 The man and his wife were both naked, but they were not ashamed.

The sense here is that the man and woman were both naked, they were bare. They were innocent, and had nothing to be ashamed of.
